What is a messaging system?
A messaging system is a mechanism for communication between applications (Application to Application or A2A). It manages messages between different applications and systems in an organization.

An example of a messaging system in use
Suppose a company has three systems:
Human Resources System (HR System): Manages information about new employees and those who have resigned.
Marketing System: Needs to receive employee information to manage its users.
Active Directory: Used to store usernames and passwords.
Without using a messaging system
A new employee is registered in the HR system resources.
The Marketing system must retrieve information from the HR database every hour and process it itself.
The Active Directory system only receives and processes new data once a day (at 1 am).
This method is that the transfer of information is delayed. Also, each system must be given different file methods (e.g. database, API, text) which adds complexity.

Using RabbitMQ
The HR system sends every change to RabbitMQ.
RabbitMQ receives the message and puts it in a queue.
The Market and Active Directory system receive and process both messages.
In this method, data transfer is done in real-time and there is no need to implement different schedules in different systems.

Major problems with old and important messaging system methods
If the number of applications increases, each application communicates with a large number of other applications. If you have P source applications and Q target applications, you need to set up P × Q communication points which becomes very complicated.
Different communication methods (database, API, file) have different formats which are difficult to manage.
Direct communication may cause applications to crash.

Using RabbitMQ, systems are decoupled, meaning that:
The source system only sends to RabbitMQ.
The target system receives what it needs from RabbitMQ.
All systems communicate in a standard format (e.g. JSON).
RabbitMQ can process large amounts of data quickly.

Run the following command:
docker run -d --name rabbitmq \
  --restart unless-stopped \
  -p 5672:5672 -p 15672:15672 \
  -e RABBITMQ_DEFAULT_USER=admin \
  -e RABBITMQ_DEFAULT_PASS=admin123 \
  -v rabbitmq_data:/var/lib/rabbitmq \
  rabbitmq:management

unless-stopped: Restarts the container unless it has been manually stopped.
always: Even if manually stopped, it will be restarted after a system restart, which is sometimes unnecessary.


How does RabbitMQ work? A simple example
Let's assume we have a specific post office:
Person A logs into the post office and sends a message.
The post office places this message in a specific queue.
Person X has informed this post office that he is interested in messages from a specific queue.
Now, whenever a new message arrives in this queue, the post office sends it to person X to process.

What is Exchange and what does it do?
Exchange acts like a post office employee who sends messages to the appropriate queues.
When it receives a message, it must decide:
Should it send the message to a specific queue?
Should it send the message to several different queues?
Should it delete the message altogether?

🔹 If the message needs to be sent to multiple queues, Exchange places a copy of the message in each queue.
Two important concepts: Message Durability and Queue Durability

🔹 By default, RabbitMQ stores messages transiently.
That is, if the RabbitMQ server is shut down or crashes, the messages are lost.
Even the queue itself may be deleted unless we define it as Durable.

✅ How to make messages and queues durable

When we create a queue, we must define it as Durable so that it is not lost after the server is shut down.
This causes the queue structure to be saved on disk and recreated after RabbitMQ is restarted.

Creating a Persistent Message
We must mark each message as Persistent when sending it so that RabbitMQ stores it on disk.
We do this by setting Delivery Mode = Persistent.
✅ If both the queue and the message are durable, RabbitMQ will try to preserve the messages even if the server is down or crashes.

Simple summary:
RabbitMQ is like a post office that manages messages.
The Producer sends the message, the Exchange sends the message to the appropriate Queue, and the Consumer receives it.
To prevent message loss, we need to make the queue and messages durable and persistent.

Producer: Person A who sends the message - the application that sends the message to RabbitMQ.
Message: The message sent - the information being sent (e.g. a JSON string).
Queue: The queue where the message is placed - a place that holds messages until they are processed.
Consumer: Person X who receives the message - the application that receives and processes messages from the queue.
Subscribe: Person X registers with the post office - the process of expressing interest in receiving messages from a queue.
Consume: Message received by person X - receiving and processing the message from the queue.
Exchange (Message Router): The post office worker that sends messages to queues - the part that receives messages from the Producer and sends them to the appropriate queue.
Routing Key: A tag on the message that specifies which queue to send it to - an address that helps RabbitMQ send the message to the correct queue.
Binding: The connection between Exchange and Queue - the process that determines which Queue to send messages from Exchange to.

